Mr. President, I stand before my colleagues as a Senator from California but also as a mother who had two complicated pregnancies and two wonderful, fabulous children, and also as a proud grandmother. I stand before you to tell you this is a very sad day for the women of America, a very sad day for the families of America, because what is about to happen here is this Senate is about to pass a piece of legislation that for the first time in history bans a medical procedure without making any exception for the health of a woman. This is a radical thing that is about to happen.

   Let's clear something up for the record. When the clerk read the bill, she said this is banning something commonly called partial-birth abortion. There is no such term in medicine as partial-birth abortion. There is either a birth or there is an abortion. There is a miscarriage. There is no such thing as partial-birth abortion. It is a made-up term to inflame passions.

   My friend knows very well, if he was willing to agree to a health exception to protect the health of women, if he would have sat down with us on our side, we are ready to ban all late-term abortion. We are ready to ban all late-term abortion on our side, as long as there is an exception for the life and the health of a woman, which is the centerpiece of Roe v. Wade. If he was willing to do that, we would not be taking the time of the Senate. This would be done.

   This is more a case of wanting to keep an issue alive out there to make people believe those on the other side are cruel, whether we are mothers or grandmothers or aunts. That is what it is about. It took me a while to figure that out. But once I saw this bill come back to us in this form--clearly unconstitutional, clearly without a health exception, clearly vague, and all those who have discussed this with me tell me it is clearly going to be declared unconstitutional because it is practically identical to other bills that have been declared unconstitutional--I saw what this is about. This is about politics. That is what I believe. Because we could have a bill today, as long as we protected the health of the women of this country.

   Why would anyone in this Chamber be so callous as to pass a law knowingly keeping out a health exception for women? Well, if you listen to my friend's words and you hear the words he uses, you will understand why this is happening from the other side. My colleague uses the term ``killing the child.'' As the author of the Violence Against Women Act and the Violence Against Children Act, I take deep offense at that language--deep offense. Women do not want to kill their child. Women who have had this procedure have come to the Congress, have begged Members of Congress: Do not pass this without a health exception for the mother. If I didn't have this procedure, I would have been made infertile.

   I am going to go into those stories later in the debate. But here is the situation. If you listen to the language ``killing the child,'' you must come to the conclusion my colleague believes abortion is murder and women are murderers and doctors are accomplices. I thought we moved away from that when Roe v. Wade became the law of the land.

   Why are we here today? I will be honest with you: because I didn't want this bill to go through, and neither do people who believe women are important. Women deserve to have their health and lives protected and their fertility protected and their organs protected. Women want to take a look at what

   this debate is all about. I have already told you we were willing to go down the aisle with my friend and ban this, as long as it was not vague and had a clear health exception for women. Forget all this other talk about how cruel we all are. We were ready to do that. But no, my friend and his colleagues had to keep this thing going. It is their way or the highway.

   Forget about what the Supreme Court has said about vagueness. Forget about what the Supreme Court has stated many times. This is basically a Republican court that has upheld Roe v. Wade.

   With the next breath my colleague says: This bill is consistent with Roe v. Wade. It doesn't do anything to Roe v. Wade.

   If that is the case, why in the conference--and I was a conferee along with the Senator from Pennsylvania--did they say--and they run the Senate and the House and the White House--we are taking out the Senate amendment authored by TOM HARKIN which simply said: The Congress believes that Roe v. Wade ought to be upheld?

   There are two things in my friend's verbiage that show exactly what this is about. One, the term, used over and over again, ``killing a child,'' which gives me a very chilling feeling that what this whole thing is about is eventually saying women are murderers and should to go jail, and doctors are their accomplices and they should go to jail. When you listen to verbiage, you hear a lot around here. And then, no problem, this bill, he says, is just in concert with Roe v. Wade, even though there is no health exception because they declared, in writing this bill, that this procedure is never necessary to save the health of a woman, which I will prove to you is made up.

   The Senators on the other side who are pushing this are not doctors. There is one, but he is not an OB/GYN. I would rather listen to the doctors. I would rather listen to the health organizations rather than my friend from Pennsylvania. I like him. We are friends. That is not the point. We just strongly see this very differently. And we will continue to see this very differently as this issue goes on and on.

   There we are. We are sitting in a conference committee. Here is where we are. The House and the Senate passed different bills. What was different about our bill, S. 3? Senator Harkin put in language, and the Senate voted on it twice--twice: once was unanimous, once was a majority--to keep Roe v. Wade in the bill, a simple statement of support of Roe. So I come to the conference committee ready, along with Senator Feinstein, and other Congress people, to debate this issue. After all, my friend says here, we don't have any problem with Roe. This has nothing to do with Roe.

   Fine. Let's keep it in the bill, folks, a sense of the Senate that Roe v. Wade should not be overturned. The Senate voted for it twice.

   Let me tell you how long it took them to kick that amendment out. It was about 5 minutes. Not even a real discussion, not even a discussion about an amendment that passed this Senate twice, not even a discussion about a law which was a landmark law which passed in 1973, which has been upheld by the Supreme Court over and over and over. That is the kind of attitude you find from the other side when it comes to a woman's right to choose. They threw out Roe v. Wade faster than you could blink an eye. That is what they want the Court to do, and that is what this bill is about. That is why I want to take time here.

   I know this thing is going to pass.

   I know exactly that it is going to pass. I have respect for that. I wish my friends would have respect for the fact that Roe passed also and leave it in this bill, so we do not send a confusing signal to the women of this country that their health no longer matters.

   The Senator from Pennsylvania says, no problem, there is no reason ever to use this procedure. Let's look at what some of the doctors' organizations say. Let's hold up some of our charts on that. I will tell you something; I never dreamed I would be down here with Senators who think they know more than doctors, but that is what happens. Let me read you a statement by the American College of OB/GYNs:

   Especially for women with particular health conditions, there is medical evidence that D&X [that is the procedure being banned] may be safer than available alternatives. A select panel convened by ACOG concluded that D&X may be ``the best or most appropriate procedure in a particular circumstance to save the life or preserve the health of a woman.''

   Look at this. You are in the Supreme Court and you are hearing this case, S. 3; this bill is coming before you. They are going to quote Senator Santorum that never is this needed to save the life--though he will not say that--of a woman. It is not a problem. Are you going to believe Senators or the doctors who deal with this every day of their working lives? Common sense tells me, when I want to go to the doctor, I don't go to the Senator from Pennsylvania. We might have a nice chat about things, a good political talk, but I don't want him telling me or my daughter; I want a doctor who knows what they are talking about.

   The doctors tell us this is necessary. Let's look at some other statements. This is a very important letter from the University of California-San Francisco, Center for Reproductive Health Research and Policy. This is a very important letter signed by a very important physician. What does she tell us. This print is too small to read, so let's get the large one that lists the problems women can face. What Dr. Stewart tells us in very clear terms is there are serious health consequences of banning safe procedures, which she considers the procedure that is being banned in this bill to be, a safe procedure: hemorrhage, uterine rupture, blood clots, embolism, stroke, damage to nearby organs, and paralysis. This is a partial list of what doctors tell us could happen to a woman if this procedure that is being banned is no longer an option.

   Who do you think the Supreme Court will listen to? Senators with no degree in OB/GYN or doctors who are telling us this is what could happen to a woman? Do you think we are doing the right thing by banning a procedure without which a woman could face damage to a nearby organ, paralysis, or a blood clot? What is it about this bill that makes it so sacrosanct that you cannot add an exception for the health of the mother? We tried everything. The straight health exception is the one that is the most constitutional. Others around here said serious adverse health consequences. Oh, no, that wasn't good enough.

   There wasn't anything we could say on behalf of the women in this country that the other side would not shoot down. I don't understand it. I do not understand that kind of mentality. Don't we love our wives and our daughters and our aunts and all the women in our lives? How could we pass a bill that would say even if a woman's health is threatened,

   this procedure cannot be used, when we could have walked down the aisle together and passed a bill with a health exception?

   So when I come before the Senate this morning, it is with a very heavy heart. But it is also with the knowledge that I think this Court is going to throw out this bill, regardless of whether colleagues say in the beginning there is no problem, no relation to a woman's health, because doctors have told us the serious health consequences of banning this procedure include all these horrible things. By the way, what is not listed here is infertility. Later today I will show you the cases of women who were spared that problem because this procedure was used on a very complicated, difficult, emergency abortion where the brain was outside the baby's head, where the child would have suffered.

   I am telling you that I don't know where the compassion is, when we would have agreed to do this with a health exception. I don't know where the compassion is on the other side. My friend talked about a civilized society. I want a civilized society. That means you care about the women of this country. That means you care about their pregnancies. That means you want to help them through the most difficult times. That means you don't play doctor here because you are not a doctor. We are about to play doctor in a big way. Fortunately, across the street in the Supreme Court they will see right through it.

   So there are many things I could tell you about this bill. I will show you some others. Let's see what the Supreme Court said about why we believe this bill is unconstitutional. There was a case called Stenberg v. Carhart. The Supreme Court found their ban of this procedure in this State--it was Nebraska, I believe--was unconstitutional. They said it put an undue burden on women because the definition is vague.

   Now the other side said they fixed that problem. We don't think they did. That will be decided. The second reason it was thrown out is there is no exception to protect women's health. I have to tell you that on both of these counts S. 3 failed the Supreme Court test. It failed it. Even some of the most anti-choice people out there have written letters criticizing the other side because they said why don't you do something that matters.

   This is going to be overturned in the Supreme Court. So why are we going through this, seeing these pictures? Once I was on the Senate floor and a colleague wanted a 5-year-old to sit up there and look at these pictures. I objected to that. That is inflaming passions. I can show pictures of what it looks like when a woman gets a blood clot or when a woman is in a wheelchair and paralyzed, but I would not do that because this is not about sensationalizing anything. It is about doing the right thing.

   I will yield the floor at this time. I see the Senator from Alabama here. I will return to continue this debate. 
   
   Mr. President, will you let me know when I have used 7 minutes and I will yield time to the Senator from New Jersey.

   I am very pleased to be joined by Senator Lautenberg. I will respond with my comments to the comments of the Senator from Kansas who was very eloquently talking about the most vulnerable among us.

   As the author, when I was in the House, of the Violence Against Women Act, as the person who offered the amendment which allowed abortion after rape in the House--and that passed for Medicaid patients--and as the author of the Violence Against Children Act today--and I hope my colleague will cosponsor that bill because it is a wonderful way to highlight the most vulnerable among us--the example the Senator talked about, the case of Samuel, illustrates why the pro-choice position is so much the right position--In that case, the doctor recommended an abortion but the parents made another choice. The parents acted and said to the doctor: We do not agree. So they had the right to choose what they wanted to do. And good for them.



   But if we legislate bans on this and bans on this--you have to have a child, you do not--and we turn into China or countries like Romania that said you shall have the babies, on the one hand, or you may not ever have a baby, on the other, then we lose the ability for families, with their God, with their conscience, with their doctor, to make the decision they want to make.

   The important thing is that the family have the choice. That is why I stand here today. I will not yield at this time. I will continue my statement. I do not want to lose my trend of thought because we are about to do something today that, although hailed by the other side, is the first time in history that the Senate is going to ban a medical procedure that is considered by many doctors--and we have put it in the RECORD, pages and scores, and I ask unanimous consent that they be printed in the Record--doctors and nurses have told us this procedure is often essential to protect the life and health of a woman.

   There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the RECORD, as follows:

   THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF

   OBSTETRICIANS AND GYNECOLOGISTS,

   Washington, DC, March 6, 2003.
Hon. BARBARA BOXER,
Hart Senate Office Building,
Washington, DC.

   DEAR SENATOR BOXER: The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) reaffirms its Statement of Policy on Intact Dilation and Extraction, initially approved by the ACOG Executive Board in 1997.

   Sincerely,

   RALPH HALE, MD,
Executive Vice President.

   Attachment.

   ACOG Statement of Policy

   STATEMENT ON INTACT DILATION AND EXTRACTION

   The debate regarding legislation to prohibit a method of abortion, such as the legislation banning ``partial birth abortion,'' and ``brain sucking abortions,'' has prompted questions regarding these procedures. It is difficult to respond to these questions because the descriptions are vague and do not delineate a specific procedure recognized in the medical literature. Moreover, the definitions could be interpreted to include elements of many recognized abortion and operative obstetric techniques.

   The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) believes the intent of such legislative proposals is to prohibit a procedure referred to as ``Intact Dilatation and Extraction'' (Intact D & X). This procedure has been described as containing all of the following four elements:

   1. Deliberate dilatation of the cervix, usually over a sequence of days;

   2. Instrumental conversion of the fetus to a footling breech;

   3. Breech extraction of the body excepting the head; and

   4. Partial evacuation of the intracranial contents of a living fetus to effect vaginal delivery of a dead but otherwise intact fetus.

   Because these elements are part of established obstetric techniques, it must be emphasized that unless all four elements are present in sequence, the procedure is not an intact D & X.

   Abortion intends to terminate a pregnancy while preserving the life and health of the mother. When abortion is performed after 16 weeks, intact D & X is one method of terminating a pregnancy. The physician, in consultation with the patient, must choose the most appropriate method based upon the patient's individual circumstances.

   According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), only 5.3% of abortions performed in the United States in 1993, the most recent data available, were performed after the 16th week of pregnancy. A preliminary figure published by the CDC for 1994 is 5.6%. The CDC does not collect data on the specific method of abortion, so it is unknown how many of these were performed using intact D & X. Other data show that second trimester transvaginal instrumental abortion is a safe procedure.

   Terminating a pregnancy is performed in some circumstances to save the life or preserve the health of the mother. Intact D & X is one of the methods available in some of these situations. A select panel convened by ACOG could identify no circumstances under which this procedure, as defined above, would be the only option to save the life or preserve the health of the woman. An intact D & X, however, may be the best or most appropriate procedure in a particular circumstance to save the life or preserve the health of a woman, and only the doctor, in consultation with the patient, based upon the woman's particular circumstances can make this decision. The potential exists that legislation prohibiting specific medical practices, such as intact D & X, may outlaw techniques that are crucial to the lives and health of American women. The intervention of legislative bodies into medical decision making is inappropriate, ill advised, and dangerous.

   Approved by the Executive Board.

   January 12, 1997.

--

   AMERICAN MEDICAL WOMEN'S

   ASSOCIATION, INC.,

   Alexandria, VA, March 25, 2003.
Hon. JERROLD NADLER,
House of Representatives,
Washington, DC.

   DEAR CONGRESSMAN NADLER: The American Medical Women's Association (AMWA) strongly opposes HR 760, the ``Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act of 2003.'' While the Association has high respect for each member and their right to hold whatever moral, religious and philosophical beliefs his or her conscience dictates, as an organization of 10,000 women physicians and medical students dedicated to promoting women's health and advancing women in medicine, we believe HR 760 is unconscionable.

   AMWA has long been an advocate for women's access to reproductive health care. As such, we recognize this legislation as an attempt to ban a procedure that in some circumstances is the safest and most appropriate alternative available to save the life and health of the woman. Furthermore, this bill violates the privilege of a patient in consultation with her physician to make the most appropriate decision regarding her specific health circumstances.

   AMWA opposes legislation such as HR 760 as inappropriate intervention in the decision-making relationship between physician and patient. The definition of the bill is too imprecise and it includes non-medical terminology for a procedure that may ultimately undermine the legality of other techniques in obstetrics and gynecology used in both abortion and non-abortion situations. At times, the use of these techniques is essential to the lives and health of women. The potential of this ban to criminalize certain obstetrics and gynecology techniques ultimately interferes with the quality of health and lives of women. Furthermore, the current ban fails to meet the provisions set forth by the Supreme Court in Stenberg v. Carhart, a ruling that overturned a Nebraska statute banning abortion because it contained no life and health exception for the mother.

   AMWA's position on this bill corresponds to the position statement of the organization on abortion and reproductive health services to women and their families.

   AMWA believe that the prevention of unintended pregnancies through access to contraception and education is the best option available for reducing the abortion rate in the United States. Legislative bans for procedures that use recognized obstetrics and gynecological techniques fails to protect the health and safety of women and their children, nor will it improve the lives of women and their families. If you have any questions please contact Meghan Kissell, at 703-838-0500.

   Sincerely,

   Lynn Epstein, MD,
President.

--

   March 10, 2003.
Hon. BARBARA BOXER,
U.S. Senate,
Washington, DC.

   DEAR SENATOR BOXER: We are writing to urge you to stand in defense of women's reproductive health and vote against S. 3, legislation regarding so-called ``partial birth'' abortion.

   We are practicing obstetrician-gynecologists, and academics in obstetrics, gynecology and women's health. We believe it is imperative that those who perform terminations and manage the pre- and post-operative care of women receiving abortions are given a voice in a debate that has largely ignored the two groups whose lives would be most affected by this legislation: physicians and patients.



   It is misguided and unprincipled for lawmakers to legislate medicine. We all want safe and effective medical procedures for women; on that there is no dispute. However, the business of medicine is not always palatable to those who do not practice it on a regular basis. The description of a number of procedures--from liposuction to cardiac surgery--may seem distasteful to some, and even repugnant to others. When physicians analyze and debate surgical techniques among themselves, it is always for the best interest of the patient. Abortion is proven to be one of the safest procedures in medicine, significantly safer than childbirth, and in fact has saved numerous women's lives.

   While we can argue as to why this legislation is dangerous, deceptive and unconstitutional--and it is--the fact of the matter is that the text of the bill is so vague and misleading that there is a great need to correct the misconceptions around abortion safety and technique. It is wrong to assume that a specific procedure is never needed; what is required is the safest option for the patient, and that varies from case to case.

   THE FACTS

   (1) So-called ``partial birth'' abortion does not exist.

   There is no mention of the term ``partial birth'' abortion in any medical literature. Physicians are never taught a technique called ``partial birth'' abortion and therefore are unable to medically define the procedure.

   What is described in the legislation, however, could ban all abortions. ``What this bill describes, albeit in non-medical terms, can be interpreted as any abortion,'' stated one of our physician members. ``Medicine is an art as much as it is a science; although there is a standard of care, each procedure--and indeed each woman--is different. The wording here could apply to any patient.'' The bill's language is too vague to be useful; in fact, it is so vague as to be harmful. It is intentionally unclear and deceptive.

   (2) Physicians need to have all medical options available in order to provide the best medical care possible.

   Tying the hands of physicians endangers the health of patients. It is unethical and dangerous for legislators to dictate specific surgical procedures. Until a surgeon examines the patient, she does not necessarily know which technique or procedure would be in the patient's best interest. Banning procedures puts women's health at risk.

   (3) Politicians should not legislate medicine.

   To do so would violate the sanctity and legality of the physician-patient relationship. The right to have an abortion is constitutionally-protected. To falsify scientific evidence in an attempt to deny women that right is unconscionable and dangerous.

   The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecology, representing 45,000 ob-gyns, agrees: ``The intervention of legislative bodies into medical decisionmaking is inappropriate, ill advised, and dangerous.''

   The American Medical Women's Association, representing 10,000 female physicians, is opposed to an abortion ban because it ``represents a serious impingement on the rights of physicians to determine appropriate medical management for individual patients.''

   THE SCIENCE

   We know that there is no such technique as ``partial birth'' abortion, and we believe this legislation is a thinly-veiled attempt to outlaw all abortions. Those supporting this legislation seem to want to confuse both legislators and the public about which abortion procedures are actually used. Since the greatest confusion seems to center around techniques that are used in the second and third trimesters, we will address those: dilation and evacuation (D&E), dilation and extraction (D&X), instillation, hysterectomy and hysterotomy (commonly known as a c-section).

   Dilation and evacuation (D&E) is the standard approach for second-trimester abortions. The only difference between a D&E and a more common, first-trimester vacuum aspiration is that the cervix must be further dilated. Morbidity and mortality studies indicate that this surgical method is preferable to labor induction methods (instillation), hysterotomy and hysterectomy.

   From the years 1972-76, labor induction procedures carried a maternal mortality rate of 16.5 (note: all numbers listed are out of 100,000); corresponding rate for D&E was 10.4. From 1977-82, labor induction fell to 6.8, but D&E dropped to 3.3. From 1983-87, induction methods had a 3.5 mortality rate, while D&E fell to 2.9. Although the difference between the methods shrank by the mid-1980s, the use of D&E had already quickly outpaced induction, thus altering the size of the sample.

   Morbidity trends indicate that dilation and evacuation is much safer than labor induction procedures, and for women with certain medical conditions, e.g., coronary artery disease or asthma, labor induction can pose serious risks. Rates of major complications from labor induction were more than twice as high as those from D&E. There are instances of women who, after having failed induction, acquired infections necessitating emergency D&Es, which ultimately saved her fertility and, in some instances, her life. Hysterotomy and hysterectomy, moreover, carry a mortality rate seven times that of induction techniques and ten times that of D&E.

   There is a psychological component which makes D&E preferable to labor induction; undergoing difficult, expensive and painful labor for up to two days is extremely emotionally and psychologically draining, much more so than a surgical procedure that can be done in a few hours under general or local anesthesia. Furthermore, labor induction does not always work: Between 15 and 30 percent of cases require surgery to complete the procedure. There is no question that D&E is the safest method of second-trimester abortion.

   There is also a technique known as dilation and extraction (D&X). D&X is merely a variant of D&E. There is a dearth of data on D&X as it is an uncommon procedure. However, it is sometimes a physician's preferred method of termination for a number of reasons: it offers a woman a chance to see the intact outcome of a desired pregnancy, thus speeding up the grieving process; it provides a greater chance of acquiring valuable information regarding hereditary illness or fetal anomaly; and there is a decreased risk of injury to the woman, as the procedure is quicker than induction and involves less use of sharp instruments in the uterus, providing a lesser chance of uterine perforations or tears and cervical lacerations.

   It is important to note that these procedures are used at varying gestational ages. Neither a D&E nor a D&X is equivalent to a late-term abortion. D&E and D&X are used solely based on the size of the fetus, the health of the woman, and the physician's judgment, and the decision regarding which procedure to use is done on a case-by-case basis.

   THE LEGISLATION

   Because this legislation is so vague, it would outlaw D&E and D&X (and arguably techniques used in the first-trimester). Indeed, the Congressional findings--which go into detail, albeit in non-medical terms--do not remotely correlate with the language of the bill. This legislation is reckless. The outcome of its passage would undoubtedly be countless deaths and irreversible damage to thousands of women and families. We can safely assert that without D&E and D&X, that is, an enactment of S. 3, we will be returning to the days when an unwanted pregnancy led women to death through illegal and unsafe procedures, self-inflicted abortions, uncontrollable infections and suicide.

   The cadre of physicians who provide abortions should be honored, not vilified. They are heroes to millions of women, offering the opportunity of choice and freedom. We urge you to consider scientific data rather than partisan rhetoric when voting on such far-reaching public health legislation. We strongly oppose legislation intended to ban so-called ``partial birth'' abortion.

   Sincerely,

   
NAtalie E. Roche, MD,

   
Assistant Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology, New Jersey Medical College.

   
Gerson Weiss, MD,

   
Professor and Chair, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Women's Health, New Jersey Medical College. March 5, 2003.
Hon. Barbara Boxer,
U.S. Senate, Hart Office Building,
Washington, DC.

   Dear Senator Boxer: I understand that your will be considering Senate S. 3, the ban on abortion procedures, soon and would like to offer some medical information that may assist you in your efforts. Important stakes for women's health are involved: if Congress enacts such a sweeping ban, the result could effectively ban safe and common, pre-viability abortion procedures.

   By way of background, I am an adjunct professor in the Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences at the University of California, San Francisco, where I co-direct the Center for Reproductive Health Research and Policy. Formerly, I directed the Reproductive Health program for the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation and served as Deputy Assistant Secretary for Population Affairs for the United States Department of Health and Human Services. I represented the United States at the International Conference on Population and Development (ICPD) in Cairo, Egypt, and currently serve on a number of Boards for organizations that promote emergency contraception and new contraceptive technologies, and support reducing teen pregnancy. My medical and policy areas of expertise are in the family planning and reproductive health, prevention of sexually transmitted infections including HIV/AIDS, and enhancing international and family planning.

   The proposed ban on abortion procedures criminalizes abortions in which the provider ``deliberately and intentionally vaginally delivers a living fetus ..... for the purpose of performing an overt act that the person knows will kill the partially delivered living fetus .....'' The criminal ban being considered is flawed in a number of respects:

   It fails to protect women's health by omitting an exception for women's health;

   It menaces medical practice with the threat of criminal prosecution;

   It encompasses a range of abortion procedures; and

   It leaves women in need of second trimester abortions with far less safe medical options: hysterotomy (similar to a cesarean section) and hysterectomy.

   The proposed ban would potentially encompass several abortion methods, including



dilation and extraction (d&x, sometimes referred to as ``intact d&e''), dilation and evacuation (d&e), the most common second-trimester procedure. In addition, such a ban could also apply to induction methods. Even if a physician is using induction as the primary method for abortion, he or she may not be able to assure that the procedure could be effected without running afoul of the proposed ban. A likely outcome if this legislation is enacted and enforced is that physicians will fear criminal prosecution for any second trimester abortion--and women will have no choice but to carry pregnancies to term despite the risks to their health. It would be a sad day for medicine if Congress decides that hysterotomy, hysterectomy, or unsafe continuation of pregnancy are women's only available options. Williams Obstetrics, one of the leading medical texts in Obstetrics and Gynecology, has this to say about the hysterotomy ``option'' that the bill leaves open:

   ``Nottage and Liston (1975), based on a review of 700 hysterotomies, rightfully concluded that the operation is outdated as a routine method for terminating pregnancy.''--Cunningham and McDonald, et al., Williams Obstetrics, 19th ed., (1993), p. 683.

    Obviously, allowing women to have a hysterectomy means that Congress is authorizing women to have an abortion at the price of their future fertility, and with the added risks and costs of major surgery. In sum, the options left open are less safe for women who need an abortion after the first trimester of pregnancy.

    I'd like to focus my attention on that subset of the women affected by this bill who face grievous underlying medical conditions. To be sure, these are not the majority of women who will be affected by this legislation, but the grave health conditions that could be worsened by this bill illustrate how sweeping the legislation is.

   Take for instance women who face hypertensive disorders such as eclampsia--convulsions precipitated by pregnancy-induced or aggravated hypertension (high blood pressure). This, along with infection and hemorrhage, is one of the most common causes of maternal death. With eclampsia, the kidneys and liver may be affected, and in some cases, if the woman is not provided an abortion, her liver could rupture, she could suffer a stroke, brain damage, or coma. Hypertensive disorders are conditions that can develop over time or spiral out of control in short order, and doctors must be given the latitude to terminate a pregnancy if necessary in the safest possible manner.

   If the safest medical procedures are not available to terminate a pregnancy, severe adverse health consequences are possible for some women who have underlying medical conditions necessitating a termination of their pregnancies, including: death (risk of death higher with less safe abortion methods); infertility; paralysis; coma; stroke; hemorrhage; brain damage; infection; liver damage; and kidney damage.

   Legislation forcing doctors to forego medically indicated abortions or to use less safe but politically-palatable procedures is simply unacceptable for women's health.

   Thank you very much, Senator, for your efforts to educate your colleagues about the implications of the proposed ban on abortion procedures.

   Sincerely,
FELICIA H. STEWART, M.D.

--

   CENTER FOR REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS,

   Washington, DC, March 6, 2003.
Hon. BARBARA BOXER,
U.S. Senate,
Washington, DC.

   DEAR SENATOR BOXER: On June 29, 2000, in Stenberg v. Carhart, 530 U.S. 914 (2000), the U.S. Supreme Court held that Nebraska's sweeping ban on abortion--misleadingly labeled a ban on so-called ``partial-birth abortion''--was unconstitutional. I was one of the attorneys who represented LeRoy Carhart, M.D., the Nebraska physician who challenged the ban in that case.

   In Carhart, the Court held that Nebraska's abortion ban was unconstitutional for two reasons. First, the Court held that the ban did not prohibit only one type of abortion procedure, but instead outlawed several methods, including the safest and ``most commonly used method for performing pre-viability second trimester abortions,'' Carhart, 530 U.S. at 945, and therefore constituted an undue burden on women's right to choose. Second, the Court held that the Nebraska ban was unconstitutional because it failed to include an exception for women's health. The Court noted that ``a State may promote but not endanger a woman's health when it regulates the methods of abortion'' and that ``the absence of a health exception will place women at an unnecessary risk of tragic health consequences.'' Carhart, 530 U.S. at 931, 937.

   The new federal bill (H.R. 760, S. 3) contains the same two flaws. Like the Nebraska law, the federal bill fails to limit the stage of pregnancy to which the bill's provisions apply, so the ban could criminalize abortions throughout pregnancy (nor just post-viability or ``late term'' abortions, as the bill's sponsors often claim), and the definition of ``partial birth abortion'' in the bill is broad enough to criminalize numerous safe abortion procedures, including the safest and most commonly used method for performing abortions early in the second trimester, the D&E method (not just one abortion procedure, as the bill's sponsors misleadingly imply). Moreover, the federal bill fails to limit its prohibitions to abortions involving an ``intact'' fetus, fails to explicitly exclude the D&E technique or the suction curettage abortion method from the law's prohibitions, and fails to include definitions of key terms such as ``living'' or ``completion of delivery.'' Like the Nebraska law, the federal bill also fails to include the constitutionally mandated health exception. Therefore, the federal bill is unconstitutional for the same reasons as the Nebraska law struck down in Carhart.

   Because the U.S. Supreme Court has already struck down legislation containing the same constitutional flaws contained in the new federal bills, these bills can only be seen as a direct attack on the Supreme Court's decision, on the safest and most common abortion procedures in the second trimester, and on the protection for women's health that have been consistently reaffirmed throughout three decades of abortion jurisprudence.

   Please feel free to contact me with any further inquiries.

   Sincerely,

   Priscilla Smith,
Director.

Let me reiterate who is being compassionate. Our side of the aisle, down to every person, and the pro-choice side of the aisle. On the other side we have a few. We agree to this ban if there is an exception for the health and life of a woman. The other side said no. And the clear fact is, when the other side says there will not be an exception for the health of the woman, the other side is not being compassionate.

   Let me tell you, when a woman is told--and we will take out what could happen to a woman if this is not available--some of the health consequences, when a woman is told she could have a stroke, that she could wind up paralyzed, that she could wind up hurting or harming other organs, we are talking about a major problem to women.

   To say you are being compassionate and you are being caring to the most vulnerable when you turn your back away from the fact that a woman could have a hemorrhage, she could have her uterus ruptured, she could be made infertile, she could have blood clots, embolism, a stroke, damage to nearby organs, or paralysis if this particular procedure is not available to her--if you have no compassion, if you smile when you look at this, if you do not feel what it is like for a woman to face this, if you put this in the back of your mind, I am sorry, in my view you are not for the most vulnerable at all.

   We could have banned this procedure if we had added a health exception. But the other side is so demagogic on this, they will not walk down the bipartisan aisle with us. That is a very sad commentary. They said the health exception is too broad. They do not trust women. Face it, they think a woman is going to make something up?

   We said, OK, add ``serious adverse health consequences.'' No, they would not do that either.

   The Supreme Court decided a very similar ban was unconstitutional. What the Supreme Court said about the fact that there was no health exception in the Stenberg v. Carhart case, that came out of Nebraska law, that had no health exception and was vague--first, they said the bill bans more than one procedure:

   Even if the statute's basic aim is to ban D&X, its language makes clear that it also covers a much broader category of procedures.

   Some would say that is the intent of the other side, to take away a woman's right to choose. So they say they are banning one procedure when, in fact, it is so vague that maybe they are banning more.

   I would have more respect and admiration for my friends on the other side if they just said, let's just ban abortion, just call it killing, put away the women into jail who have an abortion, send the doctors to jail. That is what is in their heart. But no, they do not want to do that.

   My colleague from Alabama talked about a poll. I have other polls that did not track that which I will print in the RECORD. The polls I have do not go along with those polls.

I will take 3 more minutes before I yield as much time as he may consume to my colleague from New Jersey.

   The poll I have is very difficult. We have a majority of 56 percent believing abortion should be legal in all or most cases. That is a very recent poll. It has a margin of error of 1 to 3 points; 55



percent believe the Government should not be involved in this private medical decision. I ask unanimous consent to have that printed in the RECORD.

   There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the RECORD, as follows:

   NARAL Pro-Choice America 2004 Presidential Poll

   Anna Greenberg of Greenberg, Quinlan, Rosner Research Inc. conducted this poll for NARAL Pro-Choice America between June 5, 2003 and June 12, 2003 among 1,200 likely voters with a margin of error of 1/3.

   While the 2004 election will be shaped by the economy, security and the war on terrorism, a woman's right to choose will play an important role in the presidential contest. Protecting a woman's right to choose, especially when it is framed as protecting her right to privacy and freedom from government interference, can move important swing voters including Independents and suburban voters toward a pro-choice Democratic candidate.

   Here are our findings:

   The country is pro-choice. A majority, 56 percent, believes that abortion should be legal in all or most cases.

   The country does not want the government involved in a woman's private medical decisions. Eighty percent of voters believe that abortion is a decision that should be made between a woman and her doctor as compared to just 11 percent who say it's a decision that should be made by the government. Only 27 percent of those who are identified as ``pro-life'' believe that government should make the decision. Even a majority of those who identified as ``pro-life'' (55 percent) believe that a woman and her doctor should make the decision.

   The presidential race will be competitive and choice can play an important role. After a fully informed debate that includes the candidate's position on a woman's right to choose, the race between President Bush and a generic Democrat tightens considerably. Initially, a generic Democratic candidate trails President Bush 15 points, 38 to 53 percent; after hearing the candidates' competing agendas that includes support for a woman's right to choose, the race tightens to a 6-point race, 44 to 50 percent.

   Choice moves swing voters. After hearing two statements describing the Democratic candidate and President Bush's position on choice, support for a generic Democratic candidate increases from 44 to 46 percent, while support for President Bush drops 2 points, 48 to 46 percent. This movement is driven by moderately pro-choice voters who did not yet support the Democratic candidate at that stage of the survey (more below).

   A principled commitment to privacy is the strongest message a pro-choice can make about choice. The privacy message is the strongest pro-choice message for a Democratic candidate and is consistent with the values promulgated in recent Supreme Court decisions. Fully 71 percent of voters say the privacy argument is a convincing reason to support the Democratic candidate for president; a majority (52 percent) says it is a very convincing reason.

   A woman's right to choose is a private and very personal choice, and it should remain that way. The decision to have an abortion should be a decision made between a woman and her doctor. The government should stay out of private medical decisions.

   Important swing voters move towards a pro-choice Democratic candidate. After a fully informed debate that includes the candidate's position on choice, there is a 16-point shift toward the Democratic candidate among Independent voters, a 12-point shift among suburban voters and a 10-point shift among moderate voters.

   A pro-choice Democratic candidate can improve his or her standing with moderately pro-choice voters. Voters who describe themselves as pro-choice move from a 7-point margin for a Democratic candidate (49 to 42 percent) in the initial vote to vote to a 28-point margin for a Democrat (61 to 33 percent) in the final post-choice positioning vote.

   Democrats have a strong advantage on gender issues. Whether that means women's rights, a woman's right to choose or abortion, voters believe that Democrats do a better job on these issues. The strongest advantage is on a woman's right to choose with 60 percent of voters saying Democrats do a better job on the issue as compared to just 19 percent who believe Republicans do a better job on the issue.

   Other findings of interest: 61 percent of Americans know someone who had an abortion, including 56 percent of those who identified themselves as ``pro-life.''

   Mrs. BOXER. We have different polls. But my friend from Alabama is totally correct. This is not about polls. He can prove in one poll that he is right; I can prove in one poll that I am right. The issue is in our hearts. We do not agree with each other.

   If you want to make a woman a criminal, make a doctor a criminal, come here, we will have a vote up or down on that. Do not chip away, chip away, chip away, and hurt women in the process. The Court has stated that this is unconstitutional, bottom line.

   On the other hand, my colleague said: our bill that bans this procedure is not violative of Roe because we have declared in the findings that the health issue is immaterial.

   Well, good luck. When you have doctors testifying, when you have nurses testifying, when you have health professionals testifying, when you have women testifying, ``We have had this procedure,'' because they knew they might die if they did not or they would be made infertile, and compare that to Senators or Congresspeople, I think the Court will look at the professional judgment of doctors

   because we are not doctors here. And we are certainly not God.

   So let's call it what it is. It is not compassionate to pass a bill today that turns its back on the health of women. That is not compassionate. And the Supreme Court, let's see what else they said about this particular philosophy that you are going to get in this bill and why they overturned the last one that did the same thing.

   Even if it only banned D&X, meaning the proposal my colleagues say they are banning, this ban would pose grave health risks. This is the Supreme Court:

   The record shows that significant medical authority supports the proposition that, in some circumstances, D&X would be the safest procedure.

   This is the Court, the same Court that is going to hear your ban that has no health exception:

   A statute that altogether forbids D&X creates a significant health risk. The statute consequently must contain a health exception.

   I ask my colleague if he is ready to speak because I am ready to yield the floor.



   Mrs. BOXER. Here is what we know so far. We have a bill that has no health exception. It bans a procedure doctors say is needed. We have a bill that looks just like the Supreme Court case, and the Supreme Court said it is unconstitutional. And in the course of the conference, the conferees on the other side threw out the language that supports the Roe v. Wade decision.

   This is a bad package for the families of America. I know the handwriting is on the wall that it will pass, but the issue is not going away.

   I yield to my colleague as much time as he may wish to consume, Senator Lautenberg from New Jersey. I thank him for coming over today. 
   
     I thank my colleague and friend from New Jersey for coming to the Chamber to lay out so many of the unstated issues that revolve around this debate. The points he made today are important. Before he leaves, I want to ask him a question on my time. I know he is the proudest grandpa of 9, soon to be 10, we hope and expect. You have served for many years not only in public life but as a leader in business and leader of the community.

   We hear from the other side about the need to protect the vulnerable. My friend stands with me as a supporter of the Violence Against Women Act, a supporter of the Violence Against Children Act and the need to do everything we can for the most vulnerable, to protect them from environmental hazards.

   I find it interesting that they will talk on the other side and show pictures on the other side of fetuses before

[Page: S12926]  GPO's PDF

they are born. And the compassion, I don't doubt that for a minute. I have no doubt that my colleagues feel such compassion. Believe me, I do as well. Having given birth to two premature babies, I totally understand the love and compassion you give to the child you are carrying.

   But I want to say to my friend, isn't there something missing here from this discussion of compassion? Should we not show compassion for a woman who desperately seeks to have a child and is told in the 7th month, the 6th month, something has gone terribly awry, that the baby's head is so large, the brain perhaps is developing outside of the skull, there are other problems, that the doctor says, to spare this woman a terrible life-threatening illness or to spare her infertility, that he recommends or she recommends that this procedure that is now being outlawed is the only way to, A, spare the woman from these possible health consequences which are serious and long term, could even land her in a wheelchair, render her unable to take care of her other children, and to spare that fetus, if it were born, the worst nightmare of a brief and short life? This happens to women. Does my friend not see the compassion in working with this family in a way that would give the woman dignity, preserve her health, the fetus dignity? I will talk about this because we have pro-life women, very religious, who went through this to spare the indignity to the fetus, to spare the pain to the fetus, to spare their own health. Is there not compassion in that decision and in that choice? 
   
    Mr. President, you have heard a tragic story here of a woman who had an abortion who really did not want to have one. I have to tell you, that is why I am so proud to be a pro-choice Senator, a pro-choice American, a pro-choice Californian, fighting for that woman's right to never, ever, ever have to have an abortion if she decided she did not want one.

   At the same time, I want the other side to understand that Roe v. Wade is the law of the land and that at the early stages of a pregnancy Government should stay out of a personal, private, moral, and religious decision. That is exactly what being pro-choice means. It means the woman described by my friend must never be forced to have an abortion, ever, no matter what goes wrong with the pregnancy--no matter what--if she insists on going through with it and wanting to have that child. Regardless of the risk to her health, she has the right to do it. That is what being pro-choice is about. Being anti-choice means that Government will dictate that situation.

   What we have here today and why our side has decided we wanted to have another debate on this is because, just as the other side has said, the anti-choice side has said this is a historic day, we agree. This is, indeed, a historic day because, for the first time in history, Congress will be banning a medical procedure that is considered medically necessary by physicians, physicians who know. And we will put those statements in the RECORD once again.

   My colleague, Senator DeWine, very eloquently said this debate is about what kind of a country we are. That is true. What kind of a country would say to half of its population, ``We don't trust you; We think you would choose murder''? What kind of a country would say to its doctors, who take the Hippocratic oath, ``Do no harm. We don't trust you. You are going to jail''? In this bill, they will go to jail if they use this technique and it was not to save the life of a mother.

   Imagine the circumstance where a doctor is making this decision: I think my patient might die if I don't use this. My God, I have to read the law. Oh, my God, she might live. How could I be sure? I am not positive. I think she might die.

   That woman lying in front of that doctor is in great danger. That is why so many medical organizations and OB/GYNs are saying: Please, Senators, stop playing doctor. When we were kids, we had a doctor's set. We put on the white coat. If we want to do that, we should go get our medical degree. But don't stand here and talk about the fact that we can just make this a better country by outlawing medical procedures without an exception for the health of the woman. What kind of country does that? What kind of country says to half of its population: Yes, you are important, but if you are lying on the table and you could wind up being paralyzed or getting a stroke, you are just not that important. What kind of country says that to women? That is why I am here today. This bill is going to pass overwhelmingly. We know the drill. This President is going to sign it. There is going to be a big signing ceremony. There is going to be an immediate court suit. The bill will be stayed. The debate will occur across the street in the Supreme Court. This bill is the same bill essentially that was declared unconstitutional before because the judges understand--maybe better than my colleagues over here understand--the life and the health of a woman is very important, and it must be protected in accordance with the law.

   We have been told by physicians--we have the statements in the Record--that by banning this procedure, a woman might get a hemorrhage. She might rupture her uterus. She could get very serious blood clots. She could get a stroke, an embolism. She could have damage to nearby organs. She could be paralyzed for life. Do you want to vote that way? You have a chance. If you don't make a health exception, then you are essentially saying women are just not that important.

   If you love your mother, don't vote for this bill. If you love your daughter, don't vote for this bill. Because if she finds herself in this horrific circumstance of a pregnancy gone desperately wrong, where the doctor informs her, perhaps, that the baby's brain is outside of the skull, that there would be excruciating pain if the baby is born, that she could lose her fertility, that she could perhaps suffer a stroke, she won't be able to do anything about it. Is that what we want to do here in the Senate?

   In many ways this is an exercise in politics, because we believe very strongly this bill will be overturned when it gets across the street. It is not an exercise I take lightly when colleagues think so little of the women of this country, of the mothers of this country, of the daughters of this country that they would pass a bill with no health exception.

   I don't think that is what Americans want. When they really understand this, they turn against it. If you hear it without the full explanation, of course we say: Let's not do this procedure. But if you say, but it may be necessary to save the life or health of a woman, people say: OK, then at least allow it in those circumstances.



   There isn't a Democrat on this side of the aisle who wouldn't have voted for a health exception along with a life exception, and this procedure would be banned. As a matter of fact, we have proposed--and I have written legislation--banning all late-term abortions except for a health exception and a life exception.

   We all come here and say we know what Americans want. It is interesting because, of course, we are trying to determine

   that. Senator Sessions had a poll that said women in this country no longer want the right to choose. That is what he said. I have a poll that shows everyone in this country believes Roe is a fair balance and should continue. But let me tell you what I think Americans want. Let me tell you what I know Californians want. I don't speak for every Californian. I couldn't. There are 35 million of us. But the vast majority of us--and we have had amazing polls on this point--want American women protected. They want children protected. They want privacy protected. They want women respected. They trust women more than they trust Senators. They want us to do the right thing, and they know what the right thing is.

   They understand Roe v. Wade took a very difficult decision and explained it in a way that is a balance between all the rights involved.

   Here is what Roe v. Wade essentially says: In the first 3 months after pregnancy, a woman has the right to choose and the Government cannot get involved. After that, the Government can get involved. As a matter of fact, after viability, the Government could ban all abortion, which I support, except for the life or health of a woman. I happen to believe that was a Solomon-like decision. It balanced all the concerns. But the most important thing it did is it respected women for the first time.

   This was a struggle. Women died. The Senator from Pennsylvania says it was only 85 women a year who died before Roe. We have evidence and we have articles to put in the RECORD today that will show you we believe the 5,000-a-year figure is more on the mark, because the 85 is only a report to the CDC from States where abortion was legal and in many States abortion was illegal in those years. Thousands of women died.

   As I said before, let's face it, that is what the underlying tension is in the debate, because this particular procedure is done very rarely. What is really at stake here is Roe v. Wade.

   How do I know that? I know it because of the language used on the other side over and over again: Killing children, killing children, killing children. My God, as someone who wrote the Violence Against Children Act, I have to hear people talk about the fact that women are out there every day killing children, that doctors are out there killing children.

   Roe v. Wade is not about killing children. Roe v. Wade is about respecting women to say this is a moral issue. This is a religious issue. This is a family issue. This is a privacy issue. Government should stay out in the early stages. In the later stages, government can in fact legislate.

   If you take the rhetoric used in the Chamber today and you extrapolated it in a logical fashion, it means the other side thinks all abortion is murder from the minute of conception. If there is a murder committed, there is a murderer, and you have to say that is the woman because, if you listen to their rhetoric, that is what it is about. The doctor is an accomplice in this act. Frankly, I would have more, shall we say, legislative respect for my colleagues--I have personal respect for them, but I would have more legislative respect for them--if they just came out and said, call it what it is: Abortion is murder. That is why we threw out the Harkin amendment that was in this bill supporting Roe. We think abortion is murder. We want women in jail. We want doctors in jail. Maybe they even want the death penalty for a woman. I don't know. I haven't probed them on it.

   That is really what this debate is about. It is why it is important to take the debate to the American people. The beauty of being pro-choice is you totally respect the woman regardless of her view.

   If she is 18 years old, or 17, or 19, and she wants to have that child, a pro-choice American says: What can we do to help you make it easier? But if she doesn't and it is something she wants to deal with very early in the pregnancy, then just the same way, we say it is your choice; we respect that choice.

   This debate is a very important one, a very historic debate. It is true that this bill has passed several times. We expect it to pass today. But this is the first President who will ever sign a bill outlawing a medically necessary procedure.

   Now, I am going to prove it is a medically necessary procedure because I am going to put in the RECORD a series of letters. First is the ACOG statement, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. We can play doctor all we want here. These are the folks who are out there birthing our children, out there telling us month after month, as we go back for our checkup when we are pregnant, how important it is to have good nutrition, not to smoke, not to have alcohol, how to protect that fetus and have a healthy baby. These are the people who want healthy babies born. What do they say? They say:

   The intervention of legislative bodies into medical decisionmaking is inappropriate, ill-advised, and dangerous.

   I will repeat that. The obstetricians and gynecologists from all over this country told us that:

   The intervention of legislative bodies into medical decisionmaking is inappropriate, ill-advised, and--

   The last word is powerful--

   dangerous.

   This bill, if it is upheld by the Court--which I don't believe it will be--is putting women's lives in danger. Don't ask me; ask the doctors. The testimony of Anne Davis is clear. She is a physician. She is very eloquent on the point. She even says that the life exception in the bill is very narrow, which is something I agree with, but I hope the Court will look at that. She says this procedure that is about to be banned by this bill may well be the safest procedure for women in certain circumstances. She was very clear in her testimony.

   I commend to my colleagues her testimony on March 25, 2003, before the House Subcommittee on the Constitution.

   Mr. President, the American Public Health Association writes:

   We are opposed to [this bill] because we believe this and other legislative and judicial restrictions to safe, medically accepted abortion procedures severely jeopardize women's health and well-being.

   You are going to hear my colleagues on the other side say: This bill doesn't hurt women's health--not a problem, not an issue. This bill doesn't conflict with Roe. Why? Because they wrote in the findings that this bill has nothing to do with the health of a woman. Please. Give women just a little bit of credit here.

   So here is the American Public Health Association clearly telling us why they believe this is a jeopardy to women's health and their well-being.

   Then we have the American Medical Women's Association in a letter they wrote to us. They strongly oppose this ban, and this is what they say, because I think it is a very important thing they say here:

   While the Association has high respect for each member and their right to hold whatever moral, religious and philosophical beliefs his or her conscience dictates, as an organization of 10,000 women physicians and medical students dedicated to promoting women's health and advancing women in medicine, we believe [this bill] is unconscionable.

   Doctors are telling us this bill is ``dangerous.'' These doctors are telling us that this bill puts women's health ``in jeopardy.'' Doctors are telling us loudly and clearly that this bill is ``unconscionable.'' But it is going to be passed and it will get the signature of the President and, if not overturned, it is going to hurt the women of our country.

   They go on to say:

   Legislative bans for procedures that use recognized [OB/GYN] techniques fail to protect the health and safety of women and their children, nor will it improve the lives of women and families.

   I ask unanimous consent to have this letter printed in the RECORD.

   There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the RECORD, as follows:



   AMERICAN MEDICAL WOMEN'S

   ASSOCIATION, INC.,

   Alexandria, VA, March 25, 2003.
Hon. JERROLD NADLER,
House of Representatives,
Washington, DC.

   DEAR CONGRESSMAN NADLER: The American Medical Women's Association (AMWA) strongly opposes HR 760, the ``Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act of 2003.'' While the Association has high respect for each member and their right to hold whatever moral, religious and philosophical beliefs his or her conscience dictates, as an organization of 10,000 women physicians and medical students dedicated to promoting women's health and advancing women in medicine, we believe HR 760 is unconscionable.

   AMWA has long been an advocate for women's access to reproductive health care. As such, we recognize this legislation as an attempt to ban a procedure that in some circumstances is the safest and most appropriate alternative available to save the life and health of the woman. Furthermore, this bill violates the privilege of a patient in consultation with her physician to make the most appropriate decision regarding her specific health circumstances.

   AMWA opposes legislation such as HR 760 as inappropriate intervention in the decision-making relationship between physician and patient. The definition of the bill is too imprecise and it includes non-medical terminology for a procedure that may ultimately undermine the legality of other techniques in obstetrics and gynecology used in both abortion and non-abortion situations. At times, the use of these techniques is essential to the lives and health of women. The potential of this ban to criminalize certain obstetrics and gynecology techniques ultimately interferes with the quality of health and lives of women. Furthermore, the current ban fails to meet the provisions set forth by the Supreme Court in Stenberg v. Carhart, a ruling that overturned a Nebraska statute banning abortion because it contained no life and health exception for the mother.

   AMWA's position on this bill corresponds to the position statement of the organization on abortion and reproductive health services to women and their families.

   AMWA believes that the prevention of unintended pregnancies through access to contraception and education is the best option available for reducing the abortion rate in the United States. Legislative bans for procedures that use recognized obstetrics and gynecological techniques fails to protect the health and safety of women and their children, nor will it improve the lives of women and their families. If you have any questions please contact Meghan Kissell, at 703-838-0500.

   Sincerely,

   Lynn Epstein, MD,
President.

   Mrs. BOXER. Then you have the Physicians for Reproductive Choice and Health. They make a very good point--a point we have made over and over again: There is no mention of the term ``partial-birth abortion'' in any medical literature. Physicians are never taught a technique called ``partial-birth abortion'' and cannot even define it, which is one of the things the Court said was too vague a definition. So why do you think my colleagues are banning something called partial-birth abortion when there is no such thing, according to physicians, as partial-birth abortion? I will give you 10 seconds to think it over. I gave you 10 seconds to think about why we are banning something called partial-birth abortion when there is no such medical procedure. The answer is, it is a highly charged bunch of words. There is no such thing as partial-birth abortion in the medical literature; you either have a birth or an abortion. But it charges people up. It gives you a picture that is not accurate.

   This is what the Physicians for Reproductive Choice and Health tell us:

   Physicians need to have all medical options available in order to provide the best medical care possible. It is unethical and dangerous--

   There is the word again ``dangerous''--

   for legislators to dictate the details of specific surgical procedures. Banning procedures puts women's health at risk.

   ``Risk,'' ``danger,'' ``jeopardy,'' and ``unconscionable'' are the words that go along with this bill. They are not my words. They are words of physicians who have lived their life to help women have babies. That is what they are about.

   Politicians should not legislate decisionmaking by doctors.

   They call it medical decisionmaking.

   To do so would violate the sanctity and legality of the physician-patient relationship. To falsify scientific evidence in an attempt to deny women their right is unconscionable.

   There it is. ``Unconscionable,'' ``dangerous,'' ``jeopardy,'' and ``at risk'' are the words we are being told. But we are going to vote for this bill because it is about politics. It is easy to say I cannot buy this procedure. We could have banned it completely. We could have banned all late-term abortion completely with a life exception, health exception. But, oh, no, I think the other side would rather have an issue than make progress. That is not just me talking, that is very anti-choice people who have said this is going to be overturned across the street in 5 minutes.

   I ask unanimous consent to print this letter from Physicians for Reproductive Choice and Health in the RECORD.

   There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the RECORD, as follows:

   PHYSICIANS FOR REPRODUCTIVE

   CHOICE AND HEALTH,

   New York, NY.
Hon. JERROLD NADLER,
House of Representatives,
Washington, DC.

   DEAR CONGRESSMAN NADLER: We are writing to urge you to stand in defense of women's reproductive health and vote against H.R. 760, legislation regarding so-called ``partial birth'' abortion.

   We are practicing family physicians; obstetrician-gynecologists; academics in obstetrics, gynecology and women's health; and a variety of other specialties in medicine. We believe it is imperative that those who perform terminations and manage the pre- and post-operative care of women receiving abortions are given a voice in a debate that has largely ignored the two groups whose lives would be most affected by this legislation: physicians and patients.

   It is misguided and unprincipled for lawmakers to legislate decision-making in medicine. We all want safe and effective medical procedures for women; on that there is no dispute. However, the business of medicine is not always palatable to those who do not practice it on a regular basis. The description of a number of procedures--from liposuction to cardiac surgery--may seem distasteful to some, and even repugnant to others. When physicians analyze and refine surgical techniques, it is always for the best interest of the patient. The risk of death associated with childbirth is about 11 times as high as that associated with abortion. Abortion is proven to be one of the safest procedures in medicine, significantly safer than childbirth, and in fact saves women's lives.

   While we can argue as to why this legislation is dangerous, deceptive and unconstitutional--and it is--the fact of the matter is that the text of the bill is so vague and misleading that there is a great need to correct the misconceptions around abortion safety and technique. It is wrong to assume that a specific procedure is never needed; what is required is the safest option for the patient, and that varies from case to case.

   THE FACTS

   (1) So-called ``partial birth'' abortion does not exist.

   There is no mention of the term ``partial birth'' abortion in any medical literature. Physicians are never taught a technique called ``partial birth'' abortion and therefore are unable to medically define the procedure.

   What is described in the legislation, however, could ban all abortions. ``What this bill describes, albeit in non-medical terms, can be interpreted as any abortion,'' stated one of our physician members. ``Medicine is an art as much as it is a science; although there is a standard of care, each procedure--and indeed each woman--is different. The wording here could apply to nay abortion patient.'' The bill's language is too vague to be useful; in fact, it is so vague as to be harmful. It is intentionally unclear and deceptive.

   (2) Physicians need to have all medical options available in order to provide the best medical care possible.

   Tying the hands of physicians endangers the health of patients. It is unethical and dangerous for legislators to dictate the details of specific surgical procedures. Until a surgeon examines the patient, she does not necessarily know which technique or procedure would be in the patient's best interest. Banning procedures puts women's health at risk.

   (3) Politicians should not legislate medical decision-making.

   To do so would violate the sanctity and legality of the physician-patient relationship. The right to have an abortion is constitutionally protected. To falsify scientific evidence in an attempt to deny women that right is unconscionable and dangerous.

   The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, representing 45,000 ob-gyns, agrees: ``The intervention of legislation bodies into medical decision making is inappropriate, ill advised, and dangerous.''

   The American Medical Women's Association, representing 10,000 female physicians, is opposed to an abortion ban because it ``represents a serious impingement on the rights of physicians to determine appropriate medical management for individual patients.''

   THE SCIENCE

   We know that there is no such technique as ``partial birth'' abortion, and we believe this



legislation is a thinly-veiled attempt to outlaw all abortions. Those supporting this legislation seem to want to confuse both legislators and the public about which abortion procedures are actually used. Since the greatest confusion seems to center around techniques that are used after the first trimester, we will address those: dilation and evacuation (D&E), dilation and extraction (D&X), instillation, hysterectomy and hysterotomy (commonly known as a c-section).

   Dilation and evacuation (D&E) is the standard approach for second-trimester abortions. The D&E is similar to first-trimester vacuum aspiration exception that the cervix must be further dilated because surgical instruments are used. Morbidity and mortality studies indicate D&E is preferable to labor induction methods (instillation), hysterotomy and hysterectomy because of issues regarding complications and safety.

   From the years 1972-76, labor induction procedures carried a maternal mortality rate of 16.5 (note: all numbers listed are out of 100,000); the corresponding rate for D&E was 10.4. From 1977-82, labor induction fell to 6.8, but D&E dropped to 3.3. From 1983-87, induction methods had a 3.5 mortality rate, while D&E fell to 2.9. Although the difference between the methods shrank by the mid-1980s, the use of D&E had already quickly outpaced induction.

   Morbidity trends indicate that dilation and evacuation is much safer than labor induction procedures and for women with certain medical conditions, labor induction can pose serious risks. Rates of major complications from labor induction, including bleeding, infections, and unnecessary surgery, were at least twice as high as those from D&E. There are instances of women who, after having failed inductions, acquired infections necessitating emergency D&Es as a last resort. Hysterotomy and hysterectomy, moreover, carry a mortality rate seven times that of induction techniques and ten times that of D&E.

   There is a psychological component which makes D&E preferable to labor induction, undergoing difficult, expensive and painful labor for up to two days can be extremely emotionally and psychologically difficult, much more so than a surgical procedure that can be done in less than an hour under general or local anesthesia. Furthermore, labor induction does not always work: Between 15 and 30 percent or more of cases require surgery to complete the procedure. There is no question that D&E is the safest method of second-trimester abortion.

   There is also a technique known as dilation and extraction (D&X). There is a limited medical literature on D&X because it is an uncommonly used variant of D&E. However, it is sometimes a physician's preferred method of termination for a number of reasons: It offers a woman the chance to see the intact outcome of a desired pregnancy, to speed up the grieving process; it provides a greater chance of acquiring valuable information regarding hereditary illness or fetal anomaly; and D&E provides a decreased risk of injury to the woman, as the procedure is quicker than induction and involves less use of sharp instruments in the uterus, providing a decreased chance of uterine perforations or tears and cervical lacerations. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists addressed this in their statement in opposition to so-called ``partial birth'' abortion when they said that D&X ``may be the best or most appropriate procedure in a particular circumstances to save the life or preserve the health of a woman, and only the doctor, in consultation with the patient, based on the woman's particular circumstances, can make this decision.''

   It is important to note that these procedures are used at varying gestational ages. Both D&E and D&X are options for surgical abortion prior to viability. D&E and D&X are used solely based on the size of the fetus, the health of the woman, and the physician's judgment, and the decision regarding which procedure to use is done on a case-by-case basis.

   THE LEGISLATION

   Because this legislation is so vague, it would outlaw D&E and D&X (and arguably techniques used in the first trimester). Indeed, the Congressional findings--which go into detail, albeit in non-medical terms--do not remotely correlate with the language of the bill. This legislation is reckless. The outcome of its passage would undoubtedly be countless deaths and irreversible damage to thousands of women and families. We can safely assert that without D&E and D&X, that is, an enactment of H.R. 760, we will be returning to the days when an unwanted pregnancy led women to death through illegal and unsafe procedures, self-inflicted abortions, uncontrollable infections and suicide.

   The cadre of physicians who provide abortions should be honored, not vilified. They are heroes to millions of women, offering the opportunity of choice and freedom. We urge you to consider scientific data rather than partisan rhetoric when voting on such far-reaching public health legislation. We strongly oppose legislation intended to ban so-called ``partial birth'' abortion.

   Sincerely,
MEMBER PHYSICIANS.

   Mrs. BOXER. Mr. President, I am going to read you the story of Viki Wilson. Viki is a pediatric nurse. She lives in California. Her husband Bill is an emergency room physician. The Wilsons were expecting their third child when they received a devastating diagnosis at 36 weeks of pregnancy.

   I hope every colleague will listen to this story and, for a moment, think about this couple and what they faced.

   Viki was married to an emergency room physician. They were told after 36 weeks of pregnancy, of looking forward to this baby, that a large portion of the brain was formed outside the skull and most of the baby's tissue was abnormal. They were told by several physicians, including geneticists and perinatologists that their daughter they named Abigail could never survive outside her mother's womb, and that the so-called healthy baby kicks that Viki had thought for sure she was feeling were, in fact, seizures caused by the pressure as the baby's head had lodged in her pelvis.

   Think about how you would feel if you were that father, if you were that mother, if you were that grandma, if you were that grandpa, if you were the mother of Viki or the mother-in-law or the father or the father-in-law or you were the brother of Viki or you were the brother-in-law or you were the sister or you were the aunt. They learned this pregnancy was doomed. They learned the baby they wanted so much could never live outside the womb. They learned the risks of this continued pregnancy to Viki, the very severe risks she faced.

   They decided this procedure that is being banned today was the safest and best procedure for Viki. They talked about it; they prayed on it; they discussed it with their family; they discussed it among themselves with their physicians. They brought in every specialist one can think about, and they decided this was the best thing for Viki's family and for her children and for her children she hoped to have in the future.

   The Wilsons held a funeral for Abigail, and a playground at their children's Catholic school is named in her honor. And then, very soon after, the Wilson family welcomed a baby son, actually through adoption. Is this the kind of person you want to harm? Is this the kind of woman you want to put at risk? Is this the kind of couple to which you are saying: Sorry, even if your doctors say Viki might have a stroke, Viki might be paralyzed, no can do; we can't help you because Senators playing doctor decided this procedure should no longer be a choice, an option for a woman in a severe and tragic circumstance.

   I have to tell you, I have looked inside my heart up and down. I do not understand how we move forward as a society, how we move forward as a compassionate country when we do something that can conceivably hurt thousands and thousands of women and thousands and thousands of families. We could have passed this bill in a nanosecond. Just make a health exception. It would have met the objections of the Court with the health exception and a little bit less vagueness on the procedure, and we would have done something that would have been important. But, oh, no, I guess in the end the women of this country just don't matter that much.

   I think this record is very clear. The physicians who know what they are talking about, who deal with these pregnancies every day don't want us to do this. The women, many of them very religious, who have been faced with this

   crisis tell us: Please, please make a health exception because if we didn't have this procedure, A, we might have died; B, we might have been paralyzed; C, we might have been made infertile; D, we might have had a stroke or embolism or damaged our nearby organs.

   Why are we doing this? There is no such procedure called ``partial-birth abortion.'' It is in every letter from the physicians. There is no such procedure. It is a made-up term to make this debate what it really is not about. It is a very sad day for us that we are banning a procedure that I have proven, by putting into the RECORD letter after letter from physicians, is necessary sometimes to save the life and health of a woman. We are banning this with no health exception. This is not the right thing to do.

   This bill was stripped of the supportive language of Roe v. Wade that this Senate passed twice--not once but twice--saying that Roe v. Wade should remain the law of the land. Oh, no,



they were so radical in that conference committee, they kicked out that very simple statement where most Americans agree that Roe v. Wade, making this decision in the early stages of a pregnancy in private--Government stay out of it; Senator Boxer, I might think you are really a good gal, but stay out of my private life. They are right. I don't deserve to be in it.

   Senator Harkin has just come to the Chamber. He is the one who had that amendment which was adopted by this Senate twice, and how proud I was to stand with him. I wonder if it is OK with my colleagues, since Senator Harkin has arrived, if I give him 10 minutes. 