Mr. President, I wish to take a few minutes to talk about this pending measure. First and foremost, I applaud the Senator from California, Mrs. Boxer, for her unwavering leadership and commitment in protecting a woman's right to privacy and to choose. No one has fought harder and longer, both in the House and in the Senate and in all of their public life, to protect a woman's right to choose than Senator Boxer of California.

   Senator Boxer has my highest esteem for all the work she has done to make sure that the women of this country are not controlled by ideology, by one religious belief, or by the actions of a male-dominated Senate and House of Representatives and, I might add, now a male-dominated Supreme Court.

   We are going to vote this afternoon on this so-called late-term abortion bill. I have serious questions about whether it will pass constitutional muster. I don't believe it will. So what we are doing is really a political exercise. This is what I call something to go out and get the vote for, by exciting passions, arousing fears, and by trying to state in overblown terms what this is all about.

   The bottom line and what it really comes down to is whether or not the health of the mother is a constitutionally protected right of women in this country.

   In 2000, the U.S. Supreme Court said similar State legislation was not constitutional because it lacked a health exception. It was not constitutional because there was no protection for the health of the mother. So what does the Senate and the House do? Pass legislation that still lacks the health exception. That is why it is unconstitutional.

   I am also very disappointed that the conferees stripped from the bill my sense-of-the-Senate resolution about a woman's right to privacy. I had offered, as I had before, a simple statement that it was the sense of the Senate that we supported the Roe v. Wade Supreme Court decision and it should not be overturned. It passed 52 to 46. It was attached to this late-term abortion bill which also passed the Senate. The Senator from California said the conference took less than 5 minutes to drop my resolution, without discussion.

   Roe v. Wade is the moderate, mainstream policy American women have come to rely on, and it took the conferees less than 5 minutes, without discussion, to drop it. What that says to me is very startling. Congress has turned its back on America's women--their right to privacy, their right to choose. America's women are now second-class citizens.

   Let me again give a brief review of what I am talking about. On January 22, 1973, the U.S. Supreme Court announced its decision in Roe v. Wade, a challenge to a Texas statute that made it a crime to perform an abortion unless a woman's life was at stake. That was the Texas law. The case had been filed by Jane Roe, an unmarried woman who wanted to safely and legally end her pregnancy. Siding with Roe, the Court struck down the Texas law. In its ruling, the Court recognized for the first time the constitutional right to privacy ``is broad enough to encompass a woman's decision whether or not to terminate her pregnancy.''

   It also set some rules. The Court recognized the right to privacy is not absolute and that a State has a valid interest in safeguarding maternal health, maintaining medical standards, and protecting potential life. A State's interest in ``potential life'' is not compelling, the Court said, until viability, the point in pregnancy at which there is a reasonable possibility for the sustained survival of the fetus outside of the womb.

   A State may but is not required to prohibit abortion after viability, except when it is necessary to protect a woman's life or health.

   That is what my resolution was all about, to say we agree that Roe v. Wade was an appropriate decision and should not be overturned.

   Before the 1973 landmark ruling of Roe v. Wade, it is estimated that each year 1.2 million women resorted to illegal abortions, despite the known hazards of frightening trips to dangerous locations in strange parts of town, of whiskey as an anesthetic, of ``doctors'' who were often marginal or unlicensed practitioners, sometimes alcoholic, sometimes sexually abusive, unsanitary conditions, incompetent treatment, infection, hemorrhages, disfiguration, and death. By invalidating laws that forced women to resort to back-alley abortions, Roe was directly responsible for saving women's lives.

   It is estimated as many as 5,000 women died yearly from illegal abortions before Roe. Only 10 pieces of legislation were introduced in either the House or the Senate before the Roe decision, but in the 30 years since the ruling more than 1,000 separate legislative proposals have been introduced. The majority of these bills have sought to restrict a woman's right to choose.

   Unfortunately, what is often lost in the rhetoric and in some of those proposals is the real significance of the Roe decision. The Roe decision recognized the right of women to make their own decisions about their own reproductive health.

   The decision whether to bear a child is profoundly private and life altering. As the Roe Court understood, without the right to make autonomous decisions about pregnancy, a woman could not participate freely and equally in society. Roe not only established a woman's reproductive

   freedom, it was also central to women's continued progress toward full and equal participation in American life.

   In the 30 years since Roe, the variety and level of women's achievements have reached a higher level. As the Supreme Court observed in 1992:

   The ability of women to participate equally in the economic and social life of the Nation has been facilitated by their ability to control their reproductive lives.

   As I have often said, the freedom to choose on the part of women is no more negotiable than the freedom to speak or the freedom to worship in our Constitution.

   I do not believe any abortion is desirable. I do not think anybody does. I have struggled with this issue all my adult life as a father. However, I do not believe it is appropriate to insist my personal views be the law of the land and that I impose those on anyone else. So I urge my colleagues to vote against the final bill, first because it is unconstitutional, but also because by dropping the resolution we adopted saying Roe v. Wade should continue to be the law of the land, it sends the wrong message to American women. What it says is they are not equal to men. They cannot make decisions for themselves. We men will make those decisions for them. They do not have the same protections under the Constitution in this bill. Somehow they are second-class citizens.

[Page: S12935]

   I say to the women of this country, as I have said before on the floor, they must be concerned about this.

   We passed the resolution on Roe v. Wade 52 to 46. Well, that was a win, I guess one might say, for upholding the belief that Roe v. Wade continue to be the law of the land, but 46 Senators basically voted to say Roe v. Wade ought to be overturned, that it should not be the law of the land, that we need to go back in time to prohibit all abortions, regardless.

   I say to those who may think this is just one particular procedure that we are somehow prohibiting here--and again I want to point out, as the Senator from California so eloquently pointed out time after time, this is the first time in the history of this Senate that Senators have decided against a medical procedure, the only time we have somehow put on the cloak of knowing better than doctors, professionals, and women that somehow we politicians know better.

   Aside from that, if my colleagues think this is all this is about, they are sadly mistaken. That is not what this is about. I say to the women of America, this is step one. I say especially to young women, who sort of take it for granted--I mean, Roe v. Wade was 30 years ago, ancient history in the United States of America--especially young women who believe, as they have grown up, having this freedom to choose, having the right to control their own reproductive health, if they think this is something that inures to them because they were born in America, they have another think coming. There are people who do not want them to have that right. There are people in this Senate who want to turn the clock back and say women have no right to make any decision on their reproductive health.

   But, then again, isn't that what we had in Texas before Roe v. Wade? That is what this country was like before that.

   The Supreme Court said no, there is something else that has to do with the health of a woman, too, and a woman's right to control her own body and a woman's right to privacy.

   Again, I see where this is going with 46 votes in the Senate. Just think, a couple of votes here or there in the next election, you can kiss Roe v. Wade goodbye, because that is what will happen. And with one or two Justices on the Supreme Court who feel this way, that will be the end of Roe v. Wade. That will be the end for women who think they have the right to control their own reproductive health in this country--to make their own decisions. That is where this is headed.

   I know Senators, many Senators have personal feelings about that. Fine. There are Senators who believe very deeply that Roe v. Wade should not be the law of the land, who believe it never should have been decided that way, who believe that women should not have a right over their reproductive health. There are people who believe that.

   Fine, if they want to believe that for themselves, that's their belief structure. But in this pluralistic society in which we live, in which we respect each other's rights but do not try to impose our own personal religious or moral beliefs on others, the Supreme Court really did, in fact, reach a logical and I think fair and balanced approach.

   Yet there are those who want to strip that away--that no matter what--a woman does not have the right to make her own decisions and the right to privacy. And what does that mean? Well, it will mean we're going back to the back alley.

   This, really, to me is more than just an issue about some narrow procedure, I say to my friend from California. This is about whether or not the women of this country are going to be treated as equals with men or as second-class citizens. I ask the Senator from California, rhetorically, what other times has the Senate said there are certain medical procedures which applied to men that cannot be conducted? What is next? Is there something else coming down the pike we don't know about? I don't think it will affect men but it will affect women. It is a holdover from mediaeval times, a holdover from the days in which women did not have the right to participate fully in society. That is what this is about more than anything else.

   I thank the Senator from California for her courage, for her wisdom, for her judgment, and for being so stalwart, making sure we know what this battle is about. I think we see the writing on the wall here. It is going to pass. It is going to pass. If the Supreme Court adheres to its previous decisions, it will throw it out because there is no exception for the health of the mother. I guess then there will be a political issue to whip up emotions around the countryside.

   I wish we could take emotions out of this and just talk about it on the basis of what women want. I will close on this. I have often asked, think to yourself, what would happen if we had 100 women sitting here? I mean a cross section of America, liberal, conservative, moderate, different religions, different ethnic backgrounds--just a good cross section of women in America. Do you really think, down deep in your heart, this would be passed before the Senate? No way. No way would this ever pass. Or, if you had a majority of the women in the House of Representatives? Absolutely not.

   Women do make up more than half of our society. I forget, how many women Senators do we have now?

   Mrs. BOXER. Fourteen.

   Mr. HARKIN. There are 14 out of 100. So women are drastically underrepresented in the body. They are underrepresented on the Supreme Court.

   Women have made great strides. Fourteen is more than there were when I came here--there were only one or two at the time I came here. They are making strides.

   What this says is we are going to turn the clock back. I don't want to turn the clock back and neither does the Senator from California. We have to make sure women in America have their constitutional right to privacy, just like men. That is what this is really about.

   I thank the Senator. I am proud to be on her side.

   I retain the remainder of our time. I yield the floor and retain the remainder of my time. 