Mr. President, I thank my colleague from California for her courage to stand up here and take a position when what we are seeing on the other side, with its pictures and statements about how this process is running rampant through America. It is not. We ought to face up to reality.

   My position is kind of: There they go again. There they go again, wanting to curb people's rights, rights that are abundant and ought to remain in place without us touching them, civil rights such as affirmative action, rights such as the ability to have your day in court to make your case, and not have it snatched away to protect the gun industry from lawsuits no matter how reckless their behavior.

   We do not hear anything nor have we ever seen a picture here of a gunshot victim who may never be able to walk again. We know Jim Brady will not walk again on his own, because of a gunshot wound. Do we see those kinds of pictures, the horror? Do we see surgical procedures depicted here in the Chamber, pictures of people having their intestines removed or something of that nature? Sure, they are ugly, but the point is that sometimes doctors have to do them to preserve someone's health, and that's a positive purpose.

   At any rate, the other side wants to take away workers' rights to join unions and get overtime pay. The other side wants to promote judicial nominees who are anti-choice, anti-union, and anti-civil rights.

   This is an attempt to regulate people's behavior.

   I have noticed one thing here since this debate has begun: We have not seen one woman talk in favor of the side that says: This procedure ought to be banned. Put the doctors in jail. We have 15 women in the Senate, but not one is here defending the position that says: Take away the doctors' ability to practice medicine as they see fit.

   Listen. I want to be clear here. And I want everybody to hear my voice: I am not pro-abortion. I am pro-choice. I believe a woman has the right to make a decision, in concert with her doctor, about her health.

   What happens if she has another sick child or she herself suddenly finds that her health is being ruined, physically or mentally? Does she have a right to make her decision? I think so.

   I have a child who is now pregnant with my 10th grandchild. We do not talk about abortions. Thank God, my other grandchildren and their mothers have been healthy. But we had their health checked to make sure everything was going to be OK because nothing is more important than having my three daughters and my daughter-in-law available to take care of the children they have and to make sure that their families stay intact.

   But here, in what I call the ``male-garchy'' that is the United States Senate, we have the men deciding what ought to happen with women who, with their doctor, want to make a decision to protect their health.

   The Senator from California was eloquent. She said: Provide those exceptions for the health and well-being of a mother. But no, that is not good enough: We don't like the way these women are making these decisions. We don't like it. We don't think they are mature enough to make these decisions. They are mature enough to be a mother, but are they mature enough to make their own decisions about their body? No, not according to the ``Big Boys' Club'' here; they should not be allowed to do that.

   This is always a very difficult discussion. I don't think my friends who are on the opposite side are evil; they just happen to be wrong, in my view. I do not attribute anything to them except that I want to expose what I think is the truth; and that is, this growing trend to regulate people's behavior in this free, democratic society about which we talk so much.

   When our young people fight in Iraq, when they fought in Vietnam, or in other wars--I fought in World War II--the fight has been to protect people's freedoms--freedoms. What are we doing trying to take away a right, and threatening doctors who perform a procedure they judge necessary to protect the life and health of the mother?

   I voted against this bill, and I intend to vote against the conference report. A woman's right to choose is in greater danger now than it has been at any time since the Supreme Court issued its decision in Roe v. Wade 30 years ago.

   Supporters of this bill use the term ``partial-birth abortion.'' There is no medical term ``partial-birth.'' It is a term deliberately concocted by the anti-choice movement to inflame passions. Make no mistake: the procedure(s) covered by this phony term are not chosen lightly. Does anybody here think that a woman who is 6 or 7 months along in her pregnancy, who falls prey to illness or disease, or discovers for some other reason that the pregnancy must be terminated--does anybody think that is an easy decision? It absolutely is not.

   I am the father of 4 and, as I mentioned, the grandfather of 9--Lord willing, 10 soon.

   But how can such a decision be challenged? How can the woman's decision, made in concert with her doctor, who says, ``I recommend this as a necessary procedure''--be challenged? Well, here in the ``Boys' Club,'' a woman and her doctor won't be allowed to make that decision. In my opinion, that is not right. I think the message the other side is sending to women is: Your behavior is abominable. We don't want you to do it. And here we have these poor people, these poor woman, who are risking their own health, carrying a fetus for 6 or 7 or 8 months--never a pleasant experience, I assure you.

   As I said, there is no such medical term as ``partial-birth abortion,'' and that is intentional because this bill is not designed to ban one particular abortion procedure but many safe and legal medical procedures. If S. 3 is ultimately passed, and President Bush signs it into law, as he has promised, he will become the first U.S. President to criminalize safe medical procedures.

   Nobody is fooled by the real objective here, which is to chip away at a woman's right to choose and, ultimately, to criminalize legal and safe abortion procedures.

   No. When people know what this bill is really about, they are opposed. An ABC News poll showed that 61 percent of Americans oppose criminalizing abortion procedures if a woman's health is threatened.

   The bill is deceptive. It is extreme. We already know this bill won't pass the constitutional test. When we debated this bill back in March, many of us who are pro-choice said clearly, directly, that we would accept this bill if the bill's proponents would just make an exception for the life and health of the mother. That is what we were asking for. What is wrong with that? I don't understand the other side's objection to that.

   Their obstinance shows the true position of those who want to police our conduct and decide how people ought to behave. It is too bad. It is not right.

   The sponsors of S. 3 have repeatedly resisted reasonable attempts to include a health exception such as the Feinstein substitute, which was defeated. This bill is purely political. Everybody here knows it will be ruled unconstitutional. Five members of the current Supreme Court have struck down a State ban on so-called partial-birth abortions. The same fate awaits this legislation. And in New Jersey, my State, the State Supreme Court overturned a similar ban in 2000.

   About a month ago we had a very enlightening debate on the Senate floor over an important amendment offered to S. 3 by our colleague, Senator Harkin. The amendment reaffirmed support for the Supreme Court's decision in Roe v. Wade. The House Republican leadership decided that the Senate did not have the wisdom, and their leadership and their anti-choice friends removed Senator Harkin's language in conference. Striping this bill of the Harkin amendment that reaffirms Roe v. Wade shows us what the President and his anti-choice allies are really after. They want to overturn Roe v. Wade. It has been said many times. Unfortunately, this bill puts them on that path.

   During the previous debate on this bill, the junior Senator from Pennsylvania characterized the Harkin amendment, a reaffirmation of current law, as extreme. That is absurd. Not being willing to protect a woman's health is extreme. It is extreme, and it is wrong.

   We know where this administration is headed. We know the true motives of the anti-choice administration and its allies in Congress. Look no further than the recent decision in 2002 made by the Bush administration to amend the State Children's Health Insurance Program to provide coverage for fetuses and embryos rather than for pregnant women.

   This rabid ideology extends so far that the administration won't allow the United States to participate in international family planning programs. We are so paranoid about this, it is ridiculous.

   I urge my colleagues to think this whole matter through, to put women's health and access to safe medical care before ideology, not to vote for this thinly veiled attempt to overturn Roe v. Wade. I urge that they vote against this unconstitutional bill before us.

   I yield the floor. 
   
   Mr. President, in fact, the question is a very good one. It addresses the issue we are discussing. Why is there no agreement to the request of so many of us to go along and outlaw certain procedures altogether, get rid of them, as long as the health and well-being of the mother is taken care of?

   I endowed initially--and it is still in existence--a cancer research center. It is called the Lautenberg Cancer Research Center, paid for with my own funds and people from whom I have raised money. We focus on breast cancer and other issues. We try to protect the women's health at all costs. We are not as generous here as we are to the fat cats who are going to get those huge tax cuts. Oh, no, they are entitled to theirs. But when it comes to potentially taking care of women's health, a child's health, men's health, all of it--well, it is OK to do that to a point. But to let women make their own decisions is outrageous.

   There is nothing more tragic than to see a woman unable to take care of herself or her family as a result of continuing with a pregnancy that robbed her of her well-being.

   Mrs. BOXER. Well, my friend is right. I just hope we recognize, because I know the Supreme Court recognizes it, that if we turn our backs on the women of this country as we are going to do today, first, it will never hold up across the street in the Supreme Court--no way.

   Second of all, we are threatening the health of so many women. Before my friend leaves, I want to give him two brief stories. Eileen Sullivan of California--and these women are so courageous to tell the stories--is a Catholic with 10 brothers and sisters. Eileen had long awaited her first child. She and her husband were devastated to discover, at 26 weeks of pregnancy, that testing revealed overwhelming fatal abnormalities in their son, including an improperly formed brain, a malformed head, no lungs, and a nonfunctioning liver. The severe anomalies were incompatible with life. 