Mr. President, I commend the Senator from Pennsylvania, Mr. Santorum, and Senator Frist for their leadership on this particular issue. Both have worked extremely hard. I also commend the Presiding Officer for his leadership for the rights of the unborn.

   I am pleased to be a cosponsor of the Partial-Birth Abortion Act, which is S. 3. This legislation is designed to help protect unnecessary suffering of the unborn child and also to protect the mother. It prohibits a partial-birth abortion, which is a partial delivery of a living baby, the killing of a baby before complete delivery.

   The bill allows partial-birth abortion except for the life of the mother, and in cases where there is endangerment by physical disorder, illness, and injury.

   I will go through some of the bill's definitions, which I think say a lot about what this bill is all about.

   The term ``partial-birth abortion'' means an abortion which, first, ``the person performing the abortion deliberately and intentionally vaginally delivers a living fetus until, in the case of a head-first presentation, the entire fetal head is outside the body of the mother, or, in the case of breech presentation, any part of the fetal trunk past the navel is outside the body of the mother for the purpose of performing an overt act that the person knows will kill the partially delivered living fetus.'' That is the way it is defined in the bill. Further, the term ``partial-birth abortion'' means an overt act, other than completion of delivery, that ``kills the partially delivered living fetus with this procedure.''

   This type of abortion is called a D&X abortion, which would be prohibited, also referred to as a dilation and extraction abortion. The bill defines ``extraction'' as: ``Extraction from the uterus and into the vagina of all of the body of a fetus except the head, following which the fetus is killed by extracting the contents of the skull.'' After the baby's skull tissue is rooted out, then the remains of the baby are removed.

   I emphasize, this bill does not prohibit other abortions. For example, it does not prohibit what is commonly referred to as D&E, or dilation and evacuation, a procedure which includes dismemberment of the baby inside the uterus, induction of preterm labor with the fetus forced from the uterus, and suctioning of the baby out of the uterus. It does not prohibit suction abortion, which involves scraping the fetus apart from the placenta, or suctioning the baby out of the uterus. It does not prohibit all other types of abortion that might be applied, such as a Caesarian section or a hysterotomy.

   The bill protects the life and safety of the mother. Partial-birth abortion was never intended to be a procedure to protect the health of the mother. This procedure has become a form of abortion. On the contrary, we need a ban in order to protect the health of the mother. It is a dangerous procedure, it is a fringe procedure, and it is outside the mainstream of routine medicine.

   The American Medical Association, for example, which is an organization that is committed to medical excellence on behalf of patients and professionals, opposes this procedure. The AMA has described this procedure as unsafe and dangerous. The American Medical Association has stated it is ``not good medicine,'' ``not medically indicated.''

   There are some specific exceptions: If the mother's life is in danger. The bill allows abortion if endangered by physical disorders or illness or injury.

   In the bill, again, it says:

   Any physician who, in or affecting interstate or foreign commerce, knowingly performs a partial-birth abortion and thereby kills a human fetus shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 2 years or both. This subsection does not apply to a partial-birth abortion that is necessary to save the life of a mother whose life is endangered by a physical disorder, physical illness, or physical injury, including a life-endangering physical condition caused by or arising from the pregnancy itself.

   I went through a lot of the procedures of the bill just to let the Members of the Senate know how grotesque this procedure is. This bill is necessary and important.

   This legislation is designed to protect infants. Testimony in committee indicates there is pain to the baby when this partial-birth abortion procedure is conducted. Professor Robert White, who is director of the Division of Neurosurgery and Brain Research Laboratory at Case Western Reserve School of Medicine, testified before the Constitution Subcommittee in 1995. These are his exact words:

   The fetus within this time frame of gestation, 20 weeks and beyond, is fully capable of experiencing pain. Without question, all of this is a dreadfully painful experience for any infant subject to such a surgical procedure.

   The procedure should not exist or be permitted, in my view. It is painful, morbid, inhumane, and simply barbaric. A majority of Americans believe we should end this practice and it should be illegal except if necessary to save the life of the mother.

   The House and Senate have passed a number of times on this legislation. We passed a partial-birth abortion bill from this body in the 104th, 105th, and 106th Congresses. In the 108th Congress, both the House and the Senate passed this ban--with a vote in the House of 181 for, 142 against. It was a bipartisan vote. Again, we had a bipartisan vote in the Senate, where we had 64 for and 33 against.

   It is important that we pass this particular legislation. The President strongly supports S. 3. President Bush, in his State of the Union Address, asked Congress to:

   ..... protect infants at the very moment of birth, and end the practice of partial-birth abortion.

   We need to act now. I again thank my colleagues in the Senate who have been such strong advocates of eliminating partial-birth abortion except in situations threatening the life of the mother. I am pleased we are acting now, and I thank my colleagues for their support of this important ban for the Nation's children. 