Mr. President, I thank the Senator from California. I know she cares deeply about this. I just suggest that things are not as a lot of people think with regard to the question of abortion--particularly partial-birth abortion, which we are talking about today. That is all this bill has to do with.

   I will just note that Faye Wattleton, a former president of Planned Parenthood, a very pro-choice group, and now head of a new organization, the Center for the Advancement of Women, recently commissioned a survey by the Princeton Survey Research Associates. It involved 3,329 women. This was a scientific survey. That is a very large number. A lot of polls on Presidential elections don't have that many people polled.

   That survey found that 51 percent of the women, who are supposed to be offended by this small, but horrible procedure, wanted to ban abortion altogether, or limit it to cases of rape or incest or where the mother's life is in danger.

   Another 17 percent said abortion--this is abortion in general--should be available under stricter laws than now



apply. That means that 68 percent of women polled think we ought to tighten up the laws. This idea, that dealing with partial-birth abortion is offensive to women, does not strike me as being sound based on that poll. But, of course, polls are not what we are about here. We are here to do what is right.

   I do not believe this is the kind of action that most women in America are going to be offended by. I suspect if they knew the nature of partial-birth abortion, as Senator Santorum has explained, the numbers would be higher than 68 percent opposing it. I think we are having a growing understanding of the issue.

   I thank Senator Santorum for raising this issue. He has been a good advocate of it. It is time now that we take a step that will make America a better place. We must just say no to this procedure. There are some activities that we can't allow. There are some activities that can't be justified and are so beneath the decency of a nation as great as America that we ought to ban.

   I remember the debate a number of years ago when Senator Bob Smith, a former Senator from New Hampshire, raised this issue for the first time in this Chamber. He was attacked bitterly as being an extremist, talking about things he ought not to be talking about on the floor of the Senate. But Bob Smith stood firm, as he always did, for what he believed in. He said this was wrong. But year after year has gone by. We have had hearings, and I was on the Judiciary Committee when we had hearings on it. We heard the implacable opposition from the pro-abortion forces. They wanted no yielding, no compromise, nothing that would give an inch on this issue, and they dismissed facts and figures. Senator Bob Smith will now be vindicated. He displayed courage and determination in bringing this issue up and making sure that the American people understood what it is about and why this is a significant step in protecting the innocent unborn, but certainly does not have any broad impact throughout the abortion debate.

   Many people probably did not believe what Senator Smith was saying at the time, frankly, but we have seen more about it. I think it is true that many people have not wanted to know about the gruesome details of this procedure: How a child, a baby, just 3 inches from complete birth is deliberately and systematically killed. That is not something about which we want to talk. We cringe to say the words. I wish they were not true, but unfortunately, they are true.

   The destruction of a partially born child continues to this day. It is an affront to the decency of America, and I do believe this is a rational and appropriate legislative response on behalf of the American people.

   The Senate is on record as agreeing with this view. Last year, we answered a very important question when we passed the Born Alive Infant Protection Act. This legislation basically said that if a child is accidentally born during a partial-birth abortion procedure--that is, the baby was actually born and removed from the mother--if the head was to move that final couple of inches, then that child's life would be protected. What else could we do? Why should we even have a law that would say that you have a right to kill a child who has been removed from the mother? The Born Alive Infant Protection Act was passed unanimously by this body. Partial-birth abortion inflicts pain and suffering on the child being born. That we know today. A few years ago, we were told by the experts that the anesthetic given to the mother would ensure the child feels no pain. However, we have learned this is just not true. Professional societies of anesthesiologists have refuted this claim.

   The most mind-boggling aspect of this procedure, however, is that it is absolutely unnecessary. Almost all of the partial-birth abortion procedures that are performed in America are elective and not due to any danger to the mother's

   life. A number of people during this debate have expressed concern about the life of the mother, and that is a valid concern. I heard this argument during my time on the Senate Judiciary Committee. We had a number of hearings on the subject.

   There are exceptions included in this bill to protect the life of the mother if it is in danger, although the evidence suggests that such circumstances virtually never occur.

   Even in extremely rare circumstances where the life of the mother may be endangered by a pregnancy, the only medical requirement is that she be separated from the child. There is no requirement that the child be killed. The legislation provides, however, for a contingency in which the life of a mother is threatened. It would permit this partial-birth abortion procedure but only ``to save the life of a mother whose life is endangered by physical disorder, physical illness, or physical injury, including a life-endangering physical condition caused by or arising from the pregnancy itself.''

   That is a pretty broad protection to a mother who may be endangered, but I really think it is unnecessary. The fact is the American Medical Association, a major institution in America, one that has consistently defended abortion rights, has declared this procedure is never medically necessary. That is an official position of the American Medical Association that it is never medically necessary. This is not what we need to be doing when there is a danger to the life of the mother. It is not necessary, and it should be outlawed.

   The support for ending this procedure goes beyond our traditional debate on abortion. The support exists overwhelmingly in a bipartisan way because the partial-birth abortion procedure deeply offends our sensibilities as a people, as human beings who care about one another, who know that life is fragile, and who believe that all human beings need to be treated with respect and dignity, even though they may be weak.

   The Declaration of Independence notes life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness as the ideals of the American life. Without this bill, a child partially born has those rights ripped away in a most vicious way. Allowing partial-birth abortion is a dangerous policy. It is a thin line. There is a thin thread that can justify this procedure that is, in essence, I believe, infanticide, as said by the former Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan from New York.

   This is a dangerous line we are pushing. If we say that a child partially born can be killed --- Mr. President, the pro-abortion groups implacable in their opposition to any reduction in so-called choice powers, emphatically insisted and went around the country declaring that the number of partial-birth abortions performed every year was small.

   They insisted these despicable procedures were only performed in extreme medical circumstances. Therefore, they said the Federal Government should not pass laws to stop it, but that was a flat out lie. I do not use that word often, but I will repeat it. It was not just an error. It was a lie.

   These claims were either manufactured or disseminated in an attempt to minimize the significance of the issue and to dismiss the issues raised by Senator Smith. In my view, it was based on an ends justify the means theory.

   As reported in a 1997 front-page article in the Washington Times, Mr. Ron Fitzsimmons, the executive director of the National Coalition of Abortion Providers--let me say that again, the executive director of the National Coalition of Abortion Providers, who had been traveling the country saying these procedures were rare, had a change of heart. In his own words, he publicly admitted that he had ``lied through his teeth'' about the number of partial-birth abortions that were performed.

   He estimated that ``up to 5,000 partial birth abortions are performed annually, and that they are primarily done on healthy women and healthy fetuses.'' That is what we are dealing with today.

   So I say to my colleagues on both sides of the aisle, how can we answer to our children and our constituents, our highest ideals as Americans, if we



allow children to be destroyed in this way? If we are a nation that aspires to goodness, that aspires to be above the coarse and to meet minimum standards of decency, this legislation is most strongly needed.

   I find it very puzzling that there continues to be strong resistance by a few to the banning of this one brutal procedure. I ask myself: Why is that? I have heard it said that the people who oppose partial-birth abortion do so for religious reasons, as if that is an illegitimate reason to consider as one evaluates public policy.

   Was it illegitimate when Dr. Martin Luther King marched for freedom based on his belief in the Scriptures? Religious principle is not an illegitimate reason for a motivation, but that has been a complaint about those who question the procedure.

   I have analyzed the opposition to this bill and I cannot see that it can be founded on the law. I cannot see that it can be founded on science; the AMA says it is not necessary. I cannot see that it can be founded on ethics; certainly not. Why is it? The only thing I can see is that there is a sort of a secular religious opposition to any control whatsoever on abortion that is, I believe, driven by an extremist group. We are going to allow these procedures to go forward as long as abortionists wish to perform them, they say, and you, Congress, just have no say in it whatsoever.

   I do not believe that is a rational argument. It is not justified. This legislation is specific. Mr. President, this legislation would ban one simple, gruesome, unjustifiable procedure for destroying the life of a partially born child. I do not believe that threatens anybody's principles, but I will say one thing, not doing it threatens the decency and morality of the American people. Every day that it continues is a stain on the conscience of America. 